I A HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
WE START WITH A ROLL CALL FROM
DENISE JANICE.
GOOD EVENING.
THIS MEETING WILL BE BROADCAST
LIVE ON CABLE CHANNEL 16 AT
CHANNEL 99 AND ONLINE AT THE
EIGHT TO GUBJRG ALWAYS WATCH
IN PUBLIC COMMENTARY CAN BE
MADE IN PERSON OR BY CALLING
877 EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
SEVEN OR EIGHT EIGHT EIGHT
SEVEN EIGHT EIGHT ZERO ZERO
NINE NINE INTERMEDIATED NINE
NINE SIX NINE FOUR ZERO THREE
SEVEN EIGHT SEVEN FOUR
.
COMMISSIONER WINKLER HERE
COMMISSIONER KERNOHAN HERE SHE
IS DAMBROT HERE COMMISSIONER
DAN COMMISSIONER CASS WILL BE
ABSENT TODAY COMMISSIONER GOZI
EDWARDS IS ABSENT TODAY
COMMISSIONER SILVER HERE
COUNCIL MEMBER NELSON CARE
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA HERE, VICE
CHAIR GARBER HERE YOU HAVE A
QUORUM.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANY ANYONE STANDING
FOR PUBLIC COMMENT?
I SEE NO ONE HERE.
&gt;&gt; NO, I DON&apos;T HAVE ANYBODY ON
LINE.
WELL, IN THAT CASE WE WILL GO
ON TO THE AGENDA.
YOU ALL HAD A CHANCE TO LOOK AT
THE AGENDA.
ARE THERE ANY ADDITIONS OR
DISCUSSION ANY ANY ADDITIONS
CHANGES DIRECTIONS IN THAT
CASE?
&gt;&gt; CAN WE HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA BY MOTION TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA I SECTION
ALL IN FAVOR.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; MINUTES FOR THE AUGUST 10TH
MEETING.
WE HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
MINUTES I COME IN SECOND I
SECOND DISCUSSION
I HEAR NO
DISCUSSION IN CASE UH ARE WE
READY FOR A VOTE?
&gt;&gt; I CALL VOTE ALL IN FAVOR.
I OPPOSED MINISTER APPROVED OK
NEXT THE NEXT THING WE HAVE TO
TALK ABOUT IS OUTSIDE GROUP
WORK TRAVES AND ELISABETH
ANYTHING FROM CITY COUNCIL THAT
WE SHOULD KNOW ABOUT
LIZABETH I
THINK I&apos;LL LET TRAVIS ANSWER
THAT.
&gt;&gt; I JUST HAVE ONE THING THAT
WOULD BE POTENTIALLY RELEVANT
THIS BODY IF IT PASSES I KNOW
THAT OUR ADMINISTRATION
COMMITTEE MEETING THIS WEEK
THERE WERE SOME THERE WAS SOME
DISCUSSION OF REFLECTING OUR
MASKING POLICY TO BE REFLECTIVE
OF CDC GUIDELINES AND SO IF IF
WASHINGTON COUNTY WERE IN HIGH
WE WOULD MANDATE MASKS AT
MEETINGS AND IF WE WERE BELOW
THAT WE WOULD POTENTIALLY LOSE
THAT RESTRICTION AND MAKE IT
MORE VOLUNTARY FOR FOLKS THERE
.
THERE WAS SOME DISCUSSION
OF ALSO OBVIOUSLY REFLECTING
THAT POLICY COMMISSION MEETINGS
AS WELL BUT ALLOWING
COMMISSIONERS TO KIND OF SET
THEIR OWN STANDARDS IF FOLKS
WERE MORE COMFORTABLE OR LESS
COMFORTABLE.
SO THAT MIGHT BE SOMETHING THAT
IS COMING.
I KNOW THAT IT WAS DISCUSSED AT
THAT ADMINISTRATION.
THANK YOU.
WE&apos;LL CHECK THAT OUT FOR THE
NEXT MEETING AND TRY TO GET
SOME READING BEFORE THE MEETING
STILL WILL WE DO IT&apos;D BE NICE
TO BE ABLE TO SPEAK WITHOUT A
MASK.
&gt;&gt; HOWEVER, LET&apos;S SEE FACIAL
RECOGNITION.
AIDEN AND TRAVIS, DO YOU HAVE
ANY UPDATES?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I ALSO HAVE AN UPDATE
THERE.
OBVIOUSLY WE HAVE A NEW INTERIM
POLICE CHIEF.
I HAVE STARTED THAT
CONVERSATION WITH HER AND TRIED
TO KIND OF REIGNITE SOME
MOMENTUM AROUND THIS TO HAVE
HER KIND OF INVOLVED IN LOOKING
AT WHAT CURRENT POLICIES ARE
AND WORKING WITH US TO DEVELOP
SOMETHING THAT IS REFLECTIVE
OF WHAT THE WORKING GROUP IS
TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH.
AND I&apos;VE ALSO KIND OF REGROUPED
IN SOME OF THE INITIAL
COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS WHO WERE
INTERESTED IN THIS ORDINANCE
MOVING FORWARD.
AND SO WE ARE TRYING TO KIND
OF REIGNITE THIS CONVERSATION
AFTER IT KIND OF STALLED OUT
PREVIOUSLY.
AND SO HOPEFULLY WE WILL HAVE
ANOTHER UPDATE FOR YOU HERE IN
THE NEAR FUTURE.
I KNOW THAT I KEEP SAYING THAT
BUT WE ARE HOPING THAT
POTENTIALLY WE MIGHT START
MAKING SOME PROGRESS NOW.
THANK SOME OF NEW STAKEHOLDERS
GREAT ASIAN AND AFRICAN AND
AMERICAN SOLIDARITY PICNIC I
SHOULD GOZI WHO IS ONE OF THE
PEOPLE WHO WHO I GUESS TO
ORGANIZE ESTABLISHED AND RAN
THIS PICNIC IS NOT HERE BUT SHE
TOLD ME THAT SHE THOUGHT THAT
THERE WERE SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY AND 300
PEOPLE THERE THAT IT WAS A BIG
SUCCESS.
I ATTENDED FOR A WHILE AND I
THOUGHT IT WAS FABULOUS AND THE
FOOD WAS VERY, VERY GOOD AND
THE FEELING WAS VERY NICE.
IT FELT VERY GOOD.
AIDEN AL-QAEDA SPOKE YES.
&gt;&gt; AND THERE WAS ALSO PRESIDENT
I REALLY FELT THAT IT
ACCOMPLISHED ITS PURPOSE IN
TERMS OF , YOU KNOW, WHO THERE
COULD MEET.
PEOPLE COULD SEE EACH OTHER AND
KNOW THAT WE&apos;RE ALL, YOU KNOW,
WORKING AND LIVING THE SAME
COMMUNITY LOOKING AT MAKING THE
WORLD BETTER FOR EVERYONE AND
WE SHARE COMMON CAUSE AND I
LOVED IT.
I WALKED AWAY WITH A GREAT
FEELING.
IT STAYED WITH ME ALL DAY.
I WAS REALLY HAPPY AND HOPEFUL
THAT, YOU KNOW, WE CAN DO MORE
OF THOSE AND WE DON&apos;T JUST
LEAVE IT TO, YOU KNOW, THE
COMMITTED FEW THAT PUT US
TOGETHER BUT THAT YOU KNOW, WE
CAN MAKE IT BIGGER AND KEEP
GROWING.
I WANT TO BE ABLE TO BE ONE
OF THE HELPERS NEXT TIME, YOU
KNOW, KIND OF VERY NICE FEELING
AIDEN.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, IT WAS FANTASTIC.
IT WAS JUST A PICTURE
OF COMMUNITY I LEFT FEELING
VERY SIMILARLY TO KEITA AND I
COULD EVEN SAY HOPEFUL FOR WHAT
WE CAN DO AS JUST A COMMUNITY
SWANE TOGETHER.
I THINK IT WAS AT A VERY
PIVOTAL TIME AS WE ARE DECIDING
WHO ARE ELECTED OFFICIALS ARE
AND HOW WE&apos;RE MOVING FORWARD
AND JUST AS A TEAM AS A
COMMUNITY AS ONE.
AND KEITA, YOU HAVE A VERY
FANTASTIC SPEECH AS WELL.
SHE&apos;S CALLED TO THE HRC WHO ARE
HOW TO GET A HOLD OF US THAT
WAS REALLY APPRECIATED.
THE FOOD WAS GREAT.
HOW CAN I STAY?
BUT JUST IN GENERAL IT WAS A
FANTASTIC TIME AND IT WAS JUST
SO AND OUR VERY NICE MEAL AND
JUST I WASN&apos;T THERE.
BUT I DO WANT TO GIVE A THANK
YOU TO LESLIE FOR AT THE LAST
MINUTE PUTTING TOGETHER THAT
FLIER THAT I GUESS KEITA AND
YOU AND I WILL TALK ABOUT THAT
FLOWER.
SO THANK YOU.
YOU DID IT.
YOU DID IT FOR THIS PURPOSE
RIGHT NOW WE MAY FIX IT MAKE
BETTER.
I PRINTED ONE HUNDRED OF THEM.
I DON&apos;T KNOW.
I SURE DIDN&apos;T DIDN&apos;T GET THE
FINAL COUNT SO I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW
MANY GET PASSED OUT BUT WE
TRIED AND WE WERE THERE.
&gt;&gt; TRAVIS YEAH.
JUST JUST BRIEFLY ALSO
MENTIONED I KNOW I DON&apos;T KNOW
IF EVERYONE WAS STILL THERE
WHEN THIS HAPPENED BECAUSE HE
CAME RELATIVELY LATE INTO THE
PICNIC I THINK.
BUT MICHIGAN SUPREME COURT
JUSTICE BERNSTINE ALSO DROPPED
BY AND REMINDED US THAT THIS
NOVEMBER WE ALSO HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO ELECT OUR FIRST
AFRICAN-AMERICAN FEMALE JUSTICE
OF THE MICHIGAN SUPREME COURT
AND SO EVERYONE SHOULD PAY
ATTENTION TO THEIR SUPREME
COURT RACES AND KNOW THAT THEY
CAN&apos;T JUST VOTE STRAIGHT TICKET
AND THINK THE EXTRA ATTENTION
TO THE JUDICIAL RACES.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
ANYBODY ELSE WHO WAS THERE?
&gt;&gt; WELL, I WAS THIS IS THE
SECOND ANNUAL ONE THERE WILL
PROBABLY BE ANOTHER ONE NEXT
YEAR AND IT&apos;S REALLY WORTH
ATTENDING.
I&apos;M GLAD I WENT OK
FOLLOWING UP
ON HRC WORK COMPLAINT&apos;S PUTON
PAM, DO YOU HAVE ANYTHING TO
SAY ABOUT THE COMPLAINTS ABOUT
VIOLATIONS TO THE NBA ALL SORT
OF GENERALLY WHAT KINDS
OF ISSUES WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT
EVERYTHING NEW TO REPORT REALLY
NO, I DON&apos;T HAVE ANY I DON&apos;T
HAVE A NEW REPORT BUT A NEW
COMPLAINT BUT AN ONGOING ONE
THAT IS DISABILITY RELATED.
IT&apos;S A LITTLE PROTRACTED
BECAUSE OF NON-COOPERATION
DISABILITY.
YES.
SO I REACHED OUT TO THE PARTIES
AGAIN THIS WEEK AND IF THERE IS
NO MOVEMENT THEN I MAY
RECOMMEND THAT THE COMPLAINING
PARTY ADDRESS THEIR CONCERN AT
A HIGHER LEVEL THAN WHAT WE
WOULD DO.
YEAH, A LOT OF OUR SOME OF SOME
OF OUR COMPLAINTS HAVE TO DO
WITH DISABILITY.
&gt;&gt; SOME OF THEM HAVE TO DO WITH
EMPLOYMENT AND AND WE HAVE ALSO
COMPLAINTS ABOUT HOUSING.
LINDA, YOU HAVE HAVE ONE YOU&apos;VE
ARGUING WITH TO COVER THEIR
CANCER ACCESS TO HOUSING
ORDINANCE COMPLAINTS RECENTLY
BOTH WERE HANDLED BY EDUCATING
THE LANDLORDS ABOUT THE LAW AND
AND THEY WERE PRETTY EASILY
RESOLVED ALTHOUGH WE DO NEED TO
FURTHER INVESTIGATE ZILLOW
PRACTICES AROUND THEIR
APPLICATION PROCESS, THEIR
ONLINE APPLICATION PROCESS AND
THE AUTOMATIC BACKGROUND CHECKS
THAT THAT INVOLVES SO WE WILL
FEEDBACK WE&apos;VE BEEN GETTING
LOTS OF PEOPLE WHO ARE HELPING
US IN FIND PLACES WHERE WHERE
PEOPLE DON&apos;T KNOW ABOUT THAT
LAWN.
WE&apos;RE HELPING TO EDUCATE THEM
AND MAYBE MORE WE&apos;LL SEE
.
WE HAD A COMPLAINT AT ONE POINT
THAT HAD TO DO WITH THE
WASHTENAW COUNTY JAIL AND WE
HAVE NO JURISDICTION OVER THE
JAIL SO WE DIDN&apos;T DO ANYTHING
BUT IT DID SPUR US TO HAVE TO
TAKE A TOUR OF THE JAIL.
&gt;&gt; PAM, DO YOU WANT TO TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHAT WE FOUND?
SO LESLIE AND I MET WITH THERE
WERE SEVERAL PEOPLE WHO
ACTUALLY JOINED US ON THE TOUR.
THE TOUR BEGAN IN THE
CONFERENCE ROOM THAT THEY USE A
LIEUTENANT WHO WILL BE RETIRING
IN 10 MONTHS GAVE US AN
OVERVIEW OF WHAT EVERY EMPLOYEE
AT THE JAIL IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
ADHERING TO.
THERE&apos;S A SET OF RULES AND
REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES.
IT KIND OF SUMMARIZES ITSELF IN
BEING A TREATING EVERYONE WITH
DIGNITY AND RESPECT THAT
INCLUDES STAFF, INDIVIDUAL WHO
ARE BROUGHT THERE WHO ARE
EITHER VOLUNTARILY OR
INVOLUNTARY.
AND SO WE SPENT A GOOD HOUR
REVIEWING THAT INFORMATION THAT
THEY PRESENTED VERY
COMPREHENSIVE AND THEN WE WERE
GIVEN A TOUR.
WE MET INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
EMPLOYED BY THE COUNTY JAIL
FROM THE OUTSIDE TO ASSIST
THOSE WHO WORK THERE OR WHO ARE
MANDATED TO BE THERE.
&gt;&gt; THEN WE WERE GIVEN A TOUR
OF SEVERAL OF THE AREAS OF THE
JAIL.
THERE WAS AN OLDER PART THAT WE
WERE SHOWN AND GIVEN A HISTORY
OF WHAT USED TO GOVERN AND WE
MET THE EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT
THERE AS WELL THE SHERIFF WE
ALL KNOW HER AS KATHY WYATT AND
THEN WE WERE TAKEN TO A NEWER
PART OF THE JAIL AND SHOWN THE
DIFFERENCE FROM WHAT USED TO BE
AND HOW THEY TREATED
INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE REQUIRED
TO BE THERE AND THEN WHAT THEY
CURRENTLY EXPERIENCE OR ENJOY
THE ALLEGATIONS IN THE
COMPLAINT WERE THAT THE JAIL IS
SEVERELY UNDERSTAFFED AND THAT
INDIVIDUALS ARE TREATED BADLY
WHILE WE TOURED THE PREMISES WE
DID NOT SEE THAT WE WERE TOLD
OF INSTANCE CASES OF TYPES
OF BEHAVIOR THAT THEY WOULD
HAVE TO DEAL WITH ON A REGULAR
BASIS AND HOW THEY HAD
PROCEDURES IN PLACE TO ADDRESS
THOSE CONCERNS WHILE WE WERE
THERE WE HEARD NOISES AND WE
ASKED AND INQUIRED ABOUT WHAT
THAT MEANT AND THEY EXPLAINED
THAT THERE ARE CERTAIN SECTIONS
OF THE JAIL WHERE THEY HAVE TO
ENGAGE IN CERTAIN TYPES
OF RESTRAINT TO NOT ONLY
PROTECT THE INDIVIDUAL WHO MAY
BE ENGAGING IN BEHAVIOR THAT IS
IS HARMFUL EITHER TO THEMSELVES
OR TO OTHERS.
&gt;&gt; AND SO WHILE WE DIDN&apos;T
WITNESS OR OBSERVE THAT WE
CERTAINLY HEARD LOUDER NOISES
THAT WERE EMANATING FROM A
CERTAIN AREA IN THE JAIL.
LONG STORY SHORT CAME AWAY.
I DID AND I&apos;M SURE LESLIE DID
TOO WITH A MINDSET THAT SOME
OF THE CONCERNS THAT WERE
EXPRESSED COMPLAINT WHICH WAS
ANONYMOUS DID NOT APPEAR TO
HAVE ANY BASIS.
IN FACT WE DID NOT WITNESS OR
OBSERVE WHAT WAS ALLEGED IN THE
COMPLAINT NOT SAYING IT DIDN&apos;T
OCCUR, JUST SAYING WE DIDN&apos;T
SEE IT, WE DIDN&apos;T OBSERVE IT.
IT CERTAINLY WASN&apos;T SHARED
DURING OUR OVER I THINK WE WERE
THERE WERE TWO HOURS WITH US
LINGALA AND ALL OF OUR
QUESTIONS WERE ANSWERED.
WE BELIEVE THEY WERE FORTHRIGHT
AND CONCISE.
THEY ACKNOWLEDGED THE
DISCREPANCIES FOR EXAMPLE, THE
SHORT STAFFING IS THAT THEY
HAVE WHAT STRUCK ME WAS THAT
THEY THEY WERE VERY EMPHATIC
AND IT SEEMED TO BE EVIDENT IN
THEIR DEMEANOR AND THE THE
BEHAVIOR AND WHAT WE SAW
OF OTHERS WHO EITHER JOINED US
ON THE TOUR OR WERE WILLING TO
SHARE COMMENTS OF THEIR OWN
EXPERIENCES.
LIKE MANY ORGANIZATIONS THEY
ARE NOT UNIQUE AND BEING
UNDERSTAFFED BUT THEY HAVE A
CERTAIN CRITERIA WHERE THEY
DON&apos;T ACCEPT JUST ANYONE WHO
MAKES APPLICATION FOR
EMPLOYMENT AND I FOUND THAT TO
BE VERY OPEN AND HONEST BECAUSE
THEY LEARN FROM PAST MISTAKES
OF WHAT THEY USED TO DO AND
WHAT THEY CURRENTLY DO.
I CAME AWAY WITH THE IMPRESSION
THAT THEY TRULY MAKE AN EFFORT
TO DEMONSTRATE THE HUMANNESS
OF ALL OF THE PERSONS EMPLOYED
OR WHO MAY FIND THEMSELVES
THERE EITHER WITH OR AGAINST
YOU KNOW, FOR THEIR OWN GOOD OR
AGAINST THEIR OWN WISHES.
THEY ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THEY&apos;RE
NOT PERFECT AND WHO OF US ARE
BUT THAT THEY ARE STRIVING ON A
DAILY BASIS TO CORRECT ANY
DEFICIENCIES THAT ARE BROUGHT
TO THEIR ATTENTION AND TO BE
PROACTIVE IN CERTAIN THINGS TO
INCORPORATE THINGS THAT WOULD
BE IDEAL NOT ONLY FOR THE STAFF
BUT FOR THOSE WHO FIND
THEMSELVES THERE FOR WHATEVER
REASON I FELT THAT THE ANSWERS
THAT I ASKED THEY SPEAK A LOT
OF THE ALPHABET ACRONYMS SO I
HAD THEM DEFINE WHAT THAT WAS
AND SHARE WHAT IT MEANT.
THEY WERE VERY FORTHCOMING IN
THAT AND THEN THEY ACKNOWLEDGED
THAT EVEN THOUGH THEY HAVE MADE
PROGRESS THEY STILL HAVE A LONG
WAY TO GO AND THEY&apos;RE WILLING
TO PUT FORTH THE EFFORT AND DO
WHAT IT TAKES TO ENSURE THAT
THEY DEMONSTRATE WHAT THEY SAY
NOT ONLY WHAT THEY SAY BUT WHAT
THEY ARE DOING ON A REGULAR
BASIS.
AND SO OVERALL I FELT A
POSITIVENESS AND UPON LEAVING
AND I FELT THAT THEY WEREN&apos;T
NECESSARILY TRYING TO HIDE OR
AVOID OR IGNORE EVEN SOME
OF THE CONCERNS THAT HAD BEEN
EXPRESSED IN THE COMPLAINT.
THEY ALSO EXTENDED AN OPEN
INVITATION FOR ANY AND ALL
OF US TO JOIN TO VISIT ON A
REGULAR AND TO SEE THEY MADE A
POINT OF SAYING WE&apos;RE NOT
TRYING TO HIDE ANYTHING FOR
FROM YOU AND I GOT THE
IMPRESSION THAT THEY WEREN&apos;T I
DON&apos;T THINK THAT THEY WERE
DELIBERATE IN TRYING TO AVOID
ANY AREAS.
THEY DID ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
CERTAIN AREAS WERE OFF LIMITS
OR WERE CLOSED AND IN PART THAT
WAS DUE TO UNDERSTAFFING.
BUT FOR THE MOST PART I BELIEVE
THAT WHAT WE SAW, WHAT WE
WITNESSED, WHAT WE OBSERVED WAS
CONTRARY TO WHAT HAD BEEN
DEFINED IN THE COMPLAINT AND
THAT WOULD BE MY ASSESSMENT
OF THE OF THE TOUR.
AND WHILE WE&apos;RE NOT
INVESTIGATING A COMPLAINT, WE
HAVE NO INTENTIONS OF DOING SO.
MY PERSON OPINION IS THAT SOME
OF THE ALLEGATIONS IF NOT MOST
OF THEM DID NOT HAVE MERIT.
THEY JUST DIDN&apos;T APPEAR TO BE
EVIDENT AND FROM WHAT I
OBSERVED, I&apos;M NOT CERTAIN THAT
IF AN INVESTIGATION IS
COMMENCED I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT
THAT WHAT WAS ALLEGED IN THE
COMPLAINT WHAT WOULD BEAR FRUIT
TO RESULTING IN A POSITIVE
OUTCOME AT LEAST FOR THE
COMPLAINING PARTY.
&gt;&gt; I TOO WAS IMPRESSED.
BUT I ALSO WAS AWARE THAT WE
SAW THE PEOPLE WHO WERE LESS
DANGEROUS, LESS YOU CHARGED
WITH LESS SERIOUS CRIMES AND I
WAS IMPRESSED THAT THEY TALKED
ABOUT CORRECTION VERSUS
PUNISHMENT AND THEY WERE TRYING
TO GET PEOPLE THEIR ABILITY TO
REENTER.
WELL, THEY SPENT A LOT OF TIME
INTEREST IN THAT AND ENERGY
THINKING ABOUT HOW TO DO IT.
&gt;&gt; I THINK I THINK THEY&apos;D LIKE
TO WORK WITH US IF WE IF WE
COULD FIND SOMETHING I MEAN
THEY&apos;RE VERY THEY REALLY DO
WANT TO MAKE IT BETTER.
I THINK I DID FORWARD THE
COMPLAINT TO PEOPLE WHO COULD
DO AN INVESTIGATION AND I THINK
THEY SHOULD NOT BECAUSE IT&apos;S AN
EMERGENCY BUT BECAUSE
INVESTIGATIONS ARE ALWAYS
IMPORTANT BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE DONE
A LOT OF STAFF AND THERE MIGHT
BE A LEARNING POSSIBLE
BUT AND
I DON&apos;T EXPECT AND I DON&apos;T KNOW
WHAT THEY&apos;LL FIND I MEAN YOU
JUST DON&apos;T KNOW IT&apos;S NOT OUR
JURISDICTION.
WE CAN&apos;T DO ANYTHING ABOUT BUT
WE COULD TAKE WHAT PEOPLE COULD
TAKE A TOUR AND WE MIGHT FIND
SOME WAYS THAT WE CAN CONNECT
AND BE HELPFUL TO WORK
TOGETHER.
SO IT WAS VERY INTERESTING AND
IF PEOPLE WANT TO DO IT, LET ME
KNOW AND I&apos;LL ARRANGE IT AND
AND AND IT WAS IT WAS FUN.
IT WAS IT WAS VERY YOU LEFT
FEELING VERY GOOD ABOUT IT AND
THEN YOU HAD TO COME THINK WOW,
I REALLY DON&apos;T CAPTURE WHAT
CONCLUSIONS I DRAW FROM THIS
BUT IT IT LOOKS GOOD AND IT DID
LOOK STAGED TO JUST YOU JUST
DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU DON&apos;T HAVEN&apos;T
SEEN THE WHOLE THING AND BEEN
THERE FOR A MONTH TWO PROBABLY
WORKING THERE TO KNOW FOR SURE
I MEAN NO I WANT TO ADD THAT
BUT THE PICNIC WAS PAST WEEKEND
SORT OF EMPHASIZED TO ME THE
FACT THAT WE WERE HAVING LUNCH
WITH FOLKS FROM YPSILANTI AND
PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP AND WE I
THINK REALLY SHOULD LOOK AT
BROADER COALITIONS AND
COLLABORATING.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
THAT&apos;S ON THE AGENDA.
YES.
OK, I&apos;M JUST SAYING THAT CAME
TO MY RIGHT.
YOU&apos;RE RIGHT.
YEAH.
OK, SO I&apos;M JUST GOING TO FOLLOW
THE AGENDA TRESPASS.
WE HAVE A WE HAVE A MEETING
COMING UP.
&gt;&gt; LINDA, YOU WANT TO JUST
MENTION WHEN IT&apos;S ABOUT WHAT
WE&apos;RE TRYING TO DO WHEN WE ARE
FINALLY THE WORKING GROUP THAT
INCLUDES SOME HRC MEMBERS AND
LIEUTENANT PATRICK MAGUIRE FROM
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT AND
DEPUTY CITY ATTORNEY BRIAN SLAY
TO REVISE THE TRESPASS NOTICE
REALLY TO START FROM SCRATCH
AND MAKE IT MUCH MORE USER
FRIENDLY AND CLEAR AND
HOPEFULLY DO SOMETHING ABOUT
THE THE ONE YEAR ALWAYS
DURATION OF THE TRESPASS
NOTICE.
SO WE&apos;RE GOING TO MEET TOMORROW
MORNING AND HOPEFULLY MAKE SOME
PROGRESS.
GOOD LOOKING FORWARD TO IT.
OK, OUTREACH NOW WE CAN TALK
ABOUT THE FLIER AND I DO HAVE
COPIES FOR FACHER I THINK YES.
BUT I THINK YOU&apos;VE ALL SEEN
THIS IN CASE WE HAVEN&apos;T LET&apos;S
SAY IT&apos;S GOING TO PASS THIS OUT
BEFORE THE MEETING WITH JUDA
I&apos;LL GIVE ONE TO LOSE AS LINDA
POINTED OUT, WE HAVE A BEER.
WE HAD A FLIER.
WE HAVE A VERY A AGE OLD FLIER
THAT WE HAVE WE&apos;VE GONE TO FOR
MANY YEARS AND AFTER SEEING
THAT DIANE DIANA HAD GIVEN US
LAST TIME WE WERE TALKING ABOUT
THE NEED FOR A NEW FLIER AND
SHE HAD DRAFTED SHE HAD LOCKED
ONE UP THAT WASN&apos;T THOUGHTFULLY
DONE BUT IT WAS MARKED UP AND
IT LOOKED A LOT BETTER THAN
OURS AND IT MADE SOME SENSE.
YES.
TALKING TO MIKE AND SO I TOOK
THE FLIER THAT SHE HAD MARKED
UP AND MADE A FEW CHANGES AND
GOT TOGETHER WITH DIANA AND
LINDA AND WE FINALIZED IT.
BUT YOU MIGHT WANT TO HAVE SOME
CHANGES BECAUSE WE&apos;VE GOT
ANOTHER WE&apos;VE GOT OTHER THINGS
COMING UP.
THIS FLIER MIGHT COME IN HANDY
AND WE&apos;D LIKE A GOOD COLORFUL
NICELY STATED IN ENGLISH FLIER.
&gt;&gt; SO ANY COMMENTS ABOUT THIS
FLIER WHICH I HOPE YOU READ
BEFORE?
DO YOU WANT TO TAKE A FEW
MINUTES JUST TO LOOK AT IT OR
DO YOU WANT TO COME BACK JUST
COME BACK TO ME ANOTHER TIME
WITH MY ONE COMMENT IS THAT I&apos;D
LIKE TO SEE LARGER TEXT OK.
&gt;&gt; I MEAN IN TERMS OF EASE
OF USE OF THE FONT FOR SILENTLY
ON THE WHITE PORTIONS OK, THE
PURPLE PORTIONS ARE FUN OK
ANYTHING ELSE I JUST WOULD LIKE
TO POINT OUT THAT THIS WAS DONE
IN A KIND OF RUSHED WAY.
YES, I THINK WE CAN TAKE A
LITTLE MORE TIME TO MAKE IT
BETTER AND DEFINITELY YEAH.
MAKING IT MORE READABLE WOULD
BE A BIG PART OF THAT.
YEAH.
BIG BIGGER FONT AND LESS BLANK
SPACE AND WE SHOULD THINK ABOUT
SUBSTANTIVELY WHAT OTHER
INFORMATION WE WANT TO CONVEY
ON A ONE PAGE SHEET WE CAN LOOK
AT OUR OLDER FLIER AND COMPARE
IT BUT I MEAN I THINK THIS IS A
GREAT START.
I DON&apos;T THINK THERE&apos;S A LOT
MORE OF THIS BUT MAYBE WE COULD
ALL JUST LOOK AT IT AND SEND IN
SOME COMMENTS.
OH PLEASE LOOK AT IT AND MAKE
SOME CHANGES IF YOU WANT.
I DON&apos;T WANT IT TO HAVE TOO
MANY WORDS SO I DON&apos;T WANT IT
TO HAVE MORE INFORMATION.
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW, IT&apos;S POSSIBLE TOO
THAT WE NEED MORE THAN ONE
FLIER.
WELL, YES, RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; YES, THAT&apos;S TRUE.
BUT THIS IS JUST THIS IS JUST
WHO ARE WE AND WHAT.
YEAH.
AND WE&apos;VE GOT YOUR BACK HERE&apos;S
OUR PHONE NUMBER.
&gt;&gt; CALL US I THINK IS WHAT WE
NEED FOR THIS.
YEAH.
WE WILL NEED MORE SO PLEASE GET
BACK TO ME WITH THAT.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE GOING TO NEED
SOMETHING SOON.
OTHER OUTREACH I SENT YOU WE&apos;VE
GOT A PROGRAM GOING ON WITH
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SCHOOL
OF SOCIAL WORK ONE CLASS THIS
TIME WITH ISAIAH IN 2020 IT WAS
TOO IT WAS TO GO TO CLASSES.
THIS IS ONE CLASS FOR GROUPS SO
IT&apos;S A LOT LESS PROJECT BUT IT
IS A RESEARCH PROJECT FOR THEM
WHERE THEY ASK WHERE THEY DO
RESEARCH ON A HUMAN RIGHTS KIND
OF ISSUE, AN ISSUE THAT WE&apos;VE
WERE INTERESTED IN.
THEY SCOPE OUT THE PROBLEM AND
THEY SCOPE OUT WHAT HAS BEEN
DONE OR WHAT COULD BE DONE TO
MITIGATE THE PROBLEM AND IT&apos;S
THEY&apos;RE VERY INTERESTING.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S KIND OF A WIN WIN FOR
US AND FOR THIS SOCIAL WORK
STUDENTS BECAUSE BOTH OF US ARE
GETTING A LOT OUT OF IT.
THEY CAME UP WITH FOUR TO HAVE
FOUR GROUPS AND THEY&apos;VE GOT
FOUR TITLES OF THINGS THEY WANT
TO EXPLORE AND THEY&apos;VE ASKED
FOR SOME INPUT FROM US.
SO WE I SENT THAT TO PEOPLE AND
SOME OF YOU HAVE ALREADY GIVEN
ME FEEDBACK AND THAT&apos;S
TERRIFIC.
PLEASE GIVE ME FEEDBACK SAY
TOMORROW SO I CAN GET BACK TO
THE PROFESSOR AND TELL HER WHAT
WE WANT TO DO.
I THINK THAT&apos;LL BE INTERESTING
IF THERE&apos;S SOMETHING YOU&apos;RE
ESPECIALLY INTERESTED IN OR YOU
WANT TO SAY YOU IF YOU FEEL
FREE TO CALL ON ME ANY TIME OR
ESPECIALLY IF IT&apos;S SOMETHING
YOU FEEL ESPECIALLY INTERESTED
IN OR ESPECIALLY KNOWLEDGEABLE
ABOUT AND I WILL PASS ON YOUR
YOUR NAME I MIGHT PASS ON YOUR
NAME EVEN IF YOU DON&apos;T DO THAT
BUT BUT IF YOU&apos;RE IF YOU&apos;RE
INTERESTED IN MENTORING THESE
PEOPLE OR HELPING IN SOME WAY
THAT WOULD BE GREAT.
THEY&apos;RE EXCITED AND THAT&apos;S
WONDERFUL AND MAYBE THEY CAN
COME UP WITH WONDERFUL SOME
DEFINITELY SOME RESEARCH WE CAN
USE AND MAYBE SOME SOLUTIONS
THAT THEY&apos;VE SEEN IN OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES THAT HAVE WORKED
THERE.
SO THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S ONE THING.
THE SECOND THING IS DIANA AND I
I THINK IT WAS I THINK IT WAS
FALL OF LAST YEAR OF THIS YEAR
OR NEAR THE END OF SPRING TERM.
I GUESS IT IS WE GOT TOGETHER
WITH TWO PEOPLE WHO ARE FROM
THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL OF SCHOOL
GOVERNMENTS, THE GOVERNMENT
ALLISON IS GOVERNMENT AND THEY
WANT TO PUT ON PRESENTATION TO
STUDENTS ABOUT NO, YOU&apos;RE RIGHT
.
WHAT DO WE NEED TO KNOW ABOUT
THE CITY IF WE GO OUT IN THE
CITY, WHO DO WE CALL IF WE HAVE
PROBLEMS?
&gt;&gt; WHAT ARE OUR RIGHTS IN THIS
CITY?
&gt;&gt; AND DIANE AND I ARE VERY
WE&apos;RE VERY INTERESTED.
WE&apos;D LIKE A FEW OTHER PEOPLE,
SOME OF THEM YOUNGER THAN WE
ARE TO BE.
I&apos;D BE HAPPY TO ASSIST WITH
THAT.
THAT WOULD BE GREAT ALL WAY
BACK TO THE STUDENT GOVERNMENT
DAYS AND AND USE MY YOUTH
HOPEFULLY IT&apos;S A GOOD BENEFIT.
&gt;&gt; I LIKE THAT AND WE&apos;RE GOING
TO MEET WITH THEM SOON BECAUSE
THEY&apos;RE READY TO START PLANNING
THAT PRESENTATION, WHAT CONTENT
THEY MEET AND AND I SUSPECT WE
PROBABLY WILL HAVE TO PARTNER
WITH YOU THEN POLICE AND THAT
WOULD BE USEFUL TOO BECAUSE WE
DON&apos;T KNOW FOR SURE WHO DOES
WHAT AND THAT WOULD BE A GOOD
WAY TO FIND OUT
.
AND THEN KITA, YOU WERE GOING
YOU WERE TALKING AND YOU JUST
SORT OF SAID IT HOW WE DON&apos;T
KNOW THE PEOPLE WHO ARE ON THE
OTHER HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONS
AND THERE AREN&apos;T THAT MANY ARE
CORMARK COUNTY AND WHAT WE CAN
DO TO PARTNER WITH THEM OR HELP
THEM IN SOME WAY OR
COLLABORATING SOME WAY AT LEAST
WE ARE TO KNOW WHO THEY WERE
BECAUSE I KNOW THERE IS IN
YPSILANTI HUMAN RELATIONS
COMMISSION BUT I&apos;VE NEVER YOU
KNOW, WE NEVER WORKED WITH THEM
OR WHAT WE DID YEARS AGO.
&gt;&gt; BUT THEN AGAIN, NO JUDGMENT
SINCE MY SINCE I&apos;VE BEEN YEAH.
I FEEL NOW LIKE I&apos;M SAYING WHAT
HAPPENED YEARS AGO BUT
THAT
WOULD BE WOULD BE A WONDERFUL
THING TO GET TOGETHER AND
REALLY LOOK AT WHAT ARE THEIR
KEY, YOU KNOW, PROJECTS AND AND
THERE&apos;S THE REST OF WASHTENAW
COUNTY.
I KNOW THAT WE&apos;VE GOT EQUITY
AND INCLUSION OFFICERS BUT
PRETTY MUCH NOW AND IN ALL THE
CITIES AND AND THE COUNTY AND I
THINK THERE ARE OPPORTUNITIES
TO REALLY COLLABORATE ON SOME
THINGS.
OK, DOES ANYBODY WANT TO TAKE
THAT AS A TASK JUST TO FIND OUT
WHO THESE PEOPLE ARE?
&gt;&gt; I WOULD LIKE TO TERRIFIC.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU
.
&gt;&gt; NOW WE COME TO A PROPOSED
ORDINANCE AMENDMENT.
&gt;&gt; THIS HAS TO DO WITH
ALTERNATIVE IDEAS IDEAS THAT
PARTICULAR IDEA WOULD BE THE
WASHINGTON COUNTY.
&gt;&gt; I DO.
OH, ARE WE READY TO TALK ABOUT
THE IDEA WE ARE ALL RIGHT AND
WE TALKED A LITTLE BIT ABOUT IT
BEFORE KEITA HAS DRAFTED AND I
SENT YOU A COPY OF A DRAFT OF A
RESOLUTION AND A DRAFT OF OF
WORDING FOR AMENDMENT AND ALL
OF YOU WHO&apos;VE BEEN HERE A LONG
TIME KNOW THAT IT TAKES LONG
FOR US TO THAT IT STARTS WITH
ONE DRAFT AND THEN WE GO WE
ITERATE A LOT WHICH MEANS WE
CAN TRY TO INCLUDE EVERYBODY.
WE TRY TO MAKE RIGHT BEFORE WE
GIVE IT TO CITY COUNCIL AND IT
TAKES A LONG TIME AND THIS
ONE&apos;S GOT SOME COMPLEXITIES AND
IT LOOKS AT THE ACTUALLY
DECEPTIVELY EASY AND THE MORE I
TALK TO KEITA ABOUT IT, THE
MORE I REALIZE HOW HOW
IMPORTANT IT IS AND HOW COMPLEX
IT IS IN AND HOW MUCH I DON&apos;T
KNOW ABOUT IT.
SO I ASK HIM TO TO TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT HOW SHE CAME
TO THE IDEA IN THE BEGINNING
ABOUT THE NEED FOR WASHTENAW
CARD ID CARD.
&gt;&gt; WHAT KINDS OF THINGS THEY&apos;RE
FINDING WHEN PEOPLE DON&apos;T
ACCEPT THAT CARD AND WHY IT&apos;S
SO IMPORTANT FOR US TO HAVE AN
AMENDMENT THAT THAT DOESN&apos;T
ALLOW DISCRIMINATION BECAUSE
THEY DON&apos;T HAVE ANY OTHER KIND
OF AN IDEA THAT THEY HAD THAT
IDEA INSTEAD.
AND THEN WE CAN ASK THE
QUESTIONS ABOUT WHAT SHE&apos;S GOT
SO FAR AND MOVE ON TO THE NEXT
ITERATION WILL COME SOON.
ALL RIGHT, I I WANT TO START
PRIOR TO THE PAPERWORK THAT WE
SENT OUT AND I WANT TO TAKE YOU
ALL BACK TO THE RELEASE OF THE
9/11 COMMISSION&apos;S
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT STATES
WILL BEGIN TO RESTRICT ACCESS
TO STATE IDS AND DRIVER&apos;S
LICENSES AND PART OF WHAT PART
OF THAT OCCURRED IN MICHIGAN IN
2008 AND ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS
FOUNDATIONAL ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS
BEGAN TO BE REQUIRED
OF EVERYONE AND AND IF YOU
COULD NOT PROVE LEGAL PRECEDENT
IN THE COUNTRY, YOU WERE
EXCLUDED FROM HAVING ACCESS TO
A DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE OR A STATE
ID.
&gt;&gt; I WILL PUT THAT ASIDE FOR A
MOMENT.
WHAT HAPPENED, HOWEVER, IS THAT
THE LEGISLATURE&apos;S REQUIREMENT
FOR ORIGINAL FOUNDATIONAL
DOCUMENTS LIKE BIRTH
CERTIFICATES INC. INADVERTENTLY
I THINK A CATCH 22 WHICH IS
THEY REQUIRED YOU TO HAVE AN
ORIGINAL BIRTH CERTIFICATE TO
GET STATE ID OR DRIVER&apos;S
LICENSE BUT THEY ALSO REQUIRED
OTHER AGENCIES IN THE STATE
REQUIRED THAT YOU HAVE A
GOVERNMENT ISSUED PHOTO ID TO
GET YOUR BIRTH CERTIFICATE AND
THAT WAS TRUE FOR I THINK I
COUNTED THIRTY SOMETHING STATES
SO THAT BEGAN TO TRANSPIRE.
PEOPLE DRIVER&apos;S LICENSES
EXPIRED.
&gt;&gt; SO NOW I AM AN EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR SITTING AT MY DESK.
IT&apos;S 2012 AND I&apos;M NOT INVOLVED
REALLY IN THE MOVEMENT.
STAFF CALLED AND SAID THAT THEY
HAD A STRANGE ISSUE THAT THEY
NEEDED ME TO BECOME INVOLVED IN
AND RESOLVED.
MY AGENCY HAD BEEN ASKED TO
HELP A WOMAN WHO WAS
APPROXIMATELY 70 75 YEARS OLD.
SHE WAS CAUCASIAN TO MOVE FROM
THE HOSPITAL WHERE SHE HAD BEEN
A BACK HOME AND SHE HAD
DIABETES AND NEEDED A DOCTOR&apos;S
APPOINTMENT.
&gt;&gt; SHE HAD INSURANCE.
WE DISCOVERED THAT THE HOSPITAL
HAD LOST ALL OF HER ORIGINAL
IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENTS.
SHE HAD NOTHING LEFT AND SO I
CONTACTED THE SECRETARY
OF STATE&apos;S OFFICE AND AFTER
BEING PASSED FROM PERSON TO
PERSON TO PERSON, I TAKING THIS
THREE DAYS I WAS FINALLY TOLD
THAT THERE WERE NO TEMPORARY
IDS AVAILABLE.
THERE WERE NO EMERGENCY
IDENTIFICATION CARDS TO BE
HANDED OUT AND THERE WAS NO
SOLUTION.
I&apos;D BEEN CONTACTED FOLKS WHO
WORK WITH UNDOCUMENTED FOLKS
BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE TRYING TO GET
MEDICAL CARE FOR INDIVIDUALS
WITHOUT I.D. ON A DAILY BASIS
AND THEY TOLD ME, YOU KNOW,
PACARD PLENETTE BECAUSE THEY
HAVE SUCH A BIG HEART WILL HELP
ANYONE AT ANY TIME.
&gt;&gt; BUT I BEGAN TO CALL OTHER
AGENCIES TO SAY IS ANYBODY ELSE
RUN INTO THIS PROBLEM AND JUST
ASKING THE QUESTION I BECAME
THE REPOSITORY FOR ALL OF THESE
COMMUNITIES TO SAY YES, OUR
FOLKS NO LONGER ARE NO LONGER
BEING ALLOWED TO SIGN LEASES
BECAUSE LANDLORDS WANT A VALID
STATE ID TO SIGN A LEASE WITH
SOMEONE THAT CALLS THAT SENIORS
WERE NOT BEING ALLOWED TO ENTER
REHAB FACILITIES BECAUSE THEY
WERE ALSO REQUIRING GOVERNMENT
ISSUED I.D. FOOD PANTRIES WERE
NOW REQUIRING GOVERNMENT ISSUED
I.D. BANK ACCOUNTS THAT YOU HAD
OPENED PREVIOUSLY WHEN YOUR
DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE WAS VALID YOU
COULD NO LONGER ACCESS BECAUSE
NOW YOUR DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE HAD
EXPIRED AND THE LIST WENT ON
AND ON AND IT CONTINUES TO GO
ON.
PEOPLE WOULD GO TO WORK, STOP
IN AT THE SAME STORE WHERE THEY
PICKED YEAR FOR TEN YEARS AND
ALL OF A SUDDEN THEY WOULDN&apos;T
BE SERVED.
THEY&apos;D BE REFUSED AND THAT&apos;S
WHEN WE BEGAN TO REALIZE THE
SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM OF DENYING
ALL OF THESE COMMUNITIES ACCESS
TO A GOVERNMENT ISSUED I.D.
CARD THAT WOULD VERIFY THEIR
BASIC INFORMATION WHO THEY ARE,
THEIR AGE, THEIR ADDRESS, WHERE
THEY LIVE, THE SORT
OF FUNDAMENTAL DATA THAT PEOPLE
WANT TO COLLECT BEFORE THEY
ENTER INTO A CONTRACT WITH YOU
.
&gt;&gt; THIS WAS NEVER MORE THAN TO
SAY THIS LEGISLATION IS
OVERREACHING.
IT&apos;S OVERBROAD BECAUSE IT&apos;S
EXCLUDING FOLKS FROM A SYSTEM
THAT IS NECESSARY FOR THEM TO
ACCESS OTHER FUNDAMENTAL GOODS
AND WE BEGAN TO LOOK INTO
ALTERNATIVES.
&gt;&gt; WE BEGAN TO FORM A LARGE
TASK FORCE COMPOSED
OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM ALL
OF THE AFFECTED COMMUNITIES AND
I LEFT OUT HOMELESS AND
DISABLED FOLKS ME THE LIST WENT
ON.
IT WAS HUGE AND THE SHERIFF WAS
ALSO INVOLVED BECAUSE THEY HAVE
LAW ENFORCEMENT HAS A VESTED
INTEREST IN BEING ABLE TO
IDENTIFY WHO&apos;S IN THIS
COMMUNITY.
WE HAD A TASK FORCE THE COUNTY
AT THAT POINT CHAIRED THE
COUNTY COMMISSION USE OF ROPY
AND CLERK LARRY KOESTENBAUM
STEPPED FORWARD AND SAID I KNOW
THAT THIS IS A PROBLEM.
IT IS IN MY WHEELHOUSE BECAUSE
THE COUNTY CLERK&apos;S OFFICE
MANAGES DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
ABOUT CONSTITUENTS AND THAT
THEY MANAGE BIRTH CERTIFICATES
.
SO THE WORK BEGAN BUT WAS
INTERESTING TO ME THAT WHENEVER
I GAVE A PRESENTATION PEOPLE
ALWAYS ASSUMED THAT THIS WAS
ABOUT THE UNDOCUMENTED
COMMUNITY.
&gt;&gt; AND YES, I BELIEVE THAT ON A
HUMAN RIGHTS LEVEL YOU DON&apos;T
WANT ANYONE TO LIVE WITHOUT
UTILITIES.
&gt;&gt; YOU DON&apos;T WANT PARENTS TO BE
UNABLE TO PICK THEIR CHILDREN
UP FROM SCHOOL NOT AS A PERSON.
I DON&apos;T BELIEVE WE MEAN THAT WE
DON&apos;T WANT TO CREATE THAT KIND
OF WORLD AND THAT&apos;S WHY I WAS
SO VEHEMENT ABOUT WE HAVE TO DO
SOMETHING BECAUSE THIS HAS
CREATED A GROUP BASED GROUP
OF SECOND
CLASS CITIZENS AND
NON-CITIZENS.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, WITHOUT A
GOVERNMENT ISSUED BE YOU CAN&apos;T
APPLY FOR A JOB BECAUSE YOU
CAN&apos;T COMPLETE THE IDENTITY
PORTION OF THE I9.
&gt;&gt; IT JUST GETS CRAZY.
&gt;&gt; SO AFTER TWO YEARS OF WORK
WE LOOKED INTO DIFFERENT
SOLUTIONS AND THE TASK FORCE
AND ALL OF THE COMMUNITIES
AGREED IF LAW ENFORCEMENT WOULD
ACCEPT IT THEN A GOVERNMENT A
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ISSUED I.D.
WOULD MEET THEIR NEEDS BECAUSE
WE DONE THE RESEARCH AND WE&apos;D
IDENTIFIED THAT MOST
FUNDAMENTAL DAILY NEEDS LIKE
BEING COUGH MEDICINE UP FOR
YOUR CHILD RIDING AMTRAK RIDING
GREYHOUND COULD BE MET ALL
OF THOSE REQUIREMENTS BY BEER
COULD BE MET WITH A GOVERNMENT
ISSUED BAG THAT SPECIFIED, YOU
KNOW, THE BASIC DERMAGRAFT AND
HAD YOUR PICTURE OK, SO WE
PROCEEDED AND THE WASHTENAW
COUNTY I.D. WAS RELEASED IN
JUNE OF 2001.
WE WERE THE F LOCAL GOVERNMENT
IN THE COUNTRY.
THE PERSON IN THE MIDWEST WANT
DETROIT FOLLOWED.
WE DEVELOPED A AN ELIGIBILITY
CRITERIA SYSTEM THAT WAS BASED
ON POINT BECAUSE DIFFERENT
COMMUNITIES HAD DIFFERENT
PROBLEMS MEETING STATES.
UH, I GET ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
.
SO FOR INSTANCE WE WE REFERRED
TO FOLKS WHO CANNOT ESTABLISH A
VALID VISA PRESENCE AS
UNDOCUMENTED WHEN IN FACT MOST
INDIVIDUALS I WORKED WITH WHO
WERE BORN OUTSIDE THE COUNTRY
HAVE NUMEROUS ORIGINAL BIRTH
CERTIFICATES, VOTER CARDS TO
ESTABLISH THEIR IDENTITY.
IT WAS BOTH CITIZENS BORN IN
THE UNITED STATES WHO LACKED
THOSE FOUNDATIONAL BIRTH
CERTIFICATES.
HOMELESS FOLKS WITH THESE
DOCUMENTS ARE EASILY LOST.
SENIOR CITIZENS WITH THESE
DOCUMENTS HAVE BEEN LOST BUT
BECAUSE THEY WENT TO THE SAME
PLACES AND DID THEIR BUSINESS
WITH THE SAME BANK, IT WAS
NEVER A PROBLEM UNTIL 2008.
&gt;&gt; AND THEN JUST BECAUSE THE
STAFF KNEW YOU WAS NO LONGER
GOOD ENOUGH AND REALLY ROSE TO
BE WHAT I RECOGNIZED AS A
VIOLATION OF THE UNIVERSAL
DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
ARTICLE SIX WHICH STATES THAT
EVERY ONE YOU&apos;LL HAVE THE RIGHT
TO RECOGNITION EVERYWHERE AS A
PERSON BEFORE THE LAW THE
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN
RIGHTS WAS WRITTEN SHORTLY
AFTER THE END OF WORLD WAR TWO
AND SOME FOLKS WERE TORMENTED
IN A LESS THAN EXTREME MANNER
WERE STRIPPED OF THEIR
IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENTS AND
THEN TOLD YOU CANNOT MARRY
BECAUSE YOU CANNOT PROVE WHO
YOU ARE.
YOU CANNOT TRAVEL BECAUSE YOU
CANNOT PROVE WHO YOU ARE.
YOU CANNOT PROVE WHO YOUR
FAMILY MEMBERS YOU CANNOT PROVE
WHAT YOU OWN SIMPLY BY THE
STRIPPING OF DOCUMENTS YOU WERE
NO LONGER ABLE TO EVEN STAND
FOR COURT ELEANOR ROOSEVELT
CHAIRED THE COMMITTEE THAT
DRAFTED THE UNIVERSAL
DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS.
&gt;&gt; SHEILA EARNED THAT IN THE
UNITED STATES THE DREADED
DECISION ESTABLISHED THAT NO
AFRICAN-AMERICANS SHOULD EVER
BE DEEMED A PERSON OR A CITIZEN
BEFORE THE LAW AND SHE THEN
CHAMPIONED THAT ARTICLE AND IT
WAS ESTABLISHED THAT THIS WAS A
SECOND WHERE A SECOND MEANS
OF PREVENTING THE CREATION
OF SECOND CLASS CITIZENS OR
RESIDENTS.
AND I THOUGHT THIS IS WHAT IS
HAPPENING BECAUSE WE THESE ARE
FOLKS WHO CANNOT ACCEPT SOME
VERY DAILY NECESSARY
FUNDAMENTAL THINGS AND ARE WE
WE BEGAN WE ORGANIZED AS A
HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN AND IT
PASSED IN DETROIT AND GAVE THE
DETROIT I.D. SAME ELIGIBILITY
CRITERIA, SAME SYSTEM, SAME
POINTS PROGRAM GO IF YOU DON&apos;T
HAVE A BIRTH CERTIFICATE YOU
CAN USE A DIFFERENT YOUR SOCIAL
SECURITY CARD TO ESTABLISH YOUR
IDENTITY, YOUR DIFFERENT WAYS
OF MAKING 300 POINTS.
AND BECAUSE WE WERE DOING A LOT
OF OUTREACH FOLKS THAT COULD
NOT MEET THE STATE&apos;S
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA, WE
BORROWED HEAVILY FROM THE
FEDERAL SYSTEM FOR ESTABLISHING
IDENTITY RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; SO NONE OF WHAT WE REQUEST
WAS INVENTED OUT OF WE BASED ON
OTHER SYSTEMS AND THEN
KALAMAZOO COUNTY ALSO ADOPTED
IT SO THE THREE ID CARDS
WASHTENAW COUNTIES, THE DETROIT
IDY AND THE KALAMAZOO COUNTY ID
ARE ALL THESE HUMAN RIGHTS IDS
ALL CREATED BETWEEN TWO
THOUSAND FIFTEEN AND TWO
THOUSAND SEVENTY.
SO FOR THE LAST TEN YEARS I&apos;M
SORRY MY MATH IS BAD EIGHT
YEARS WE&apos;VE WATCHING TO SEE HOW
HOW ARE WE DOING?
DID WE ACCOMPLISH THE GOAL
FIRST LAW ENFORCEMENT HAS BEEN
FABULOUS AND THEY RECOGNIZED
THE CARD ACCEPT THE CARD
CAUTION FOLKS THAT IT IS NOT A
DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE HOWEVER THEY
RECOGNIZE THIS.
WE RECOGNIZE THAT PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO PICK THEIR CHILDREN UP
FROM SCHOOL.
THEY&apos;VE YOU KNOW, THAT&apos;S JUST
PART OF LIVING AND THEY&apos;RE
GOING TO GO TO WORK.
&gt;&gt; BUT OF COURSE THEY HAVE TO
HAVE THEM PULL OFF THE ROAD
THAT THEY DON&apos;T USE THE CAR.
THIS IS THEIR FORM
OF IDENTIFICATION.
HOMELESS FOLKS HAVE THE CAR.
PEOPLE ARE NO LONGER AFRAID TO
REPORT CRIME BECAUSE THEY CAN
PROVE WHO THEY ARE TO POLICE
AND THAT HAD BEEN A PROBLEM
EVEN WHEN THEY OR THEIR
CHILDREN WERE THE VICTIMS
OF CRIME.
WE HAD TEENAGERS REPORT THAT
THEIR FATHERS WERE SOMETIMES
AFRAID TO LEAVE THE HOUSE
BECAUSE THEY HAD NO ID AND
SHOULD ANYTHING HAPPEN TO THEM
NO ONE WOULD BE ABLE TO TELL
THEIR FAMILIES THE IT JUST GUT
WRENCHING WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT
THE LIVING WITH THAT INABILITY
TO TELL PEOPLE WHO YOU ARE AND
ESTABLISH YOUR YOUR YOUR RIGHT
TO BE THERE.
SO IT HAS BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN
TERMS OF HELPING PEOPLE
INTERFACE MORE COMFORTABLY WITH
LAW ENFORCEMENT.
&gt;&gt; IT HAS BEEN REALLY
SUCCESSFUL IN ENABLING PEOPLE
TO ACCESS UTILITY SERVICES,
MUNICIPAL SERVICES, COUNTY
SERVICES AND BIRTH
CERTIFICATES.
IT HAS BEEN VERY SUCCESSFUL IN
HELPING PEOPLE APPLY FOR JOBS.
&gt;&gt; IN FACT THE ONE THING WE DID
A SURVEY 73 PERCENT OF ALL
FOLKS THAT APPLIED FOR THE I.D.
USED THE CAR TO APPLY FOR JOBS
SO IT WAS SUCCESSFUL IN THAT
REGARD.
IT WAS NOT SUCCESSFUL IN
ENABLING INDIVIDUALS
PARTICULARLY FOLKS FROM THE
LATINO COMMUNITY TO ACCESS SOME
THINGS LIKE SERVICE AT A
RESTAURANT WHEN THEY ORDER
ALCOHOL, A BOTTLE OF WINE, THE
IDEA IS NOT ACCEPTED EVEN IF
THEY&apos;VE GOT GRAY HAIR HOUSING.
&gt;&gt; IF YOU ARE NOT LATINO
THERE&apos;S A SEPARATE TIER OF I
WOULD CALL IT WHERE PEOPLE FEEL
DEPUTIZED.
LET&apos;S SAY THAT TO TO POLICE AND
TO SURVEY.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
SO I QUESTION WHETHER YOU HAVE
A RIGHT TO BE HERE IN THIS
COUNTRY.
THEREFORE I&apos;M NOT GOING TO SELL
YOU WHAT I I DON&apos;T THINK YOU
SHOULD YOU DESERVE BECAUSE YOU
MAYBE SHOULDN&apos;T BE HERE THAT
KIND OF DEPUTIZATION I MEAN SO
LESS SUCCESSFUL IN THAT REGARD
AND REALLY UNSUCCESSFUL IN
RESTORING PEOPLE&apos;S ABILITY TO
INTERACT WITH CERTAIN
INSTITUTIONS FROM WITH DIGNITY
LIKE MAX I&apos;M I&apos;VE BEEN CALLED
ANY NUMBER OF TIMES AND ASKED
TO ACCOMPANY PEOPLE TO THE BANK
AND WHEN ONE INDIVIDUAL HAD A
MENTAL ILLNESS THE BANKER
SIMPLY WOULDN&apos;T DO BUSINESS
WITH HIM.
I HAD TO TAKE HIS POWER
OF ATTORNEY IN ORDER TO PULL
THE RETIREMENT MONEY OUT OF HIS
ACCOUNT AND MOVED INTO A
DISABILITY TRUST SO THAT HE
COULD QUALIFY FOR MEDICAID.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S THE OTHER THINGS THAT
I SEE THAT I WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS BECAUSE I KNOW THAT THE
REGULATIONS
AND THE STATE
STATUTES AND THE FEDERAL
STATUTES UP DO NOT MANDATE THE
ID CARDS THAT VENDORS AND
BUSINESSES ARE TELLING PEOPLE
REQUIRED AND IT IS ALMOST
IMPOSSIBLE FOR ME TO VISIT
EVERY PHARMACY AND ENABLE FOLKS
TO ACCESS SIR AND I THINK THAT
THIS BECOMES MORE LIKE A SOURCE
OF INCOME DISCRIMINATION IN
THAT JUST LIKE SOURCE OF INCOME
DISCRIMINATION.
HOUSING SUBSIDIES WERE PROVIDED
TO LOWER AND MODERATE INCOME
FAMILIES TO ENABLE THEM TO
ACCESS HOUSING IN ANN ARBOR.
BUT IT REQUIRED A PUBLIC
PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PUBLIC
COULD HELP GOVERNMENT COULD
HELP BY THE SUBSIDY.
BUT THE LANDLORDS HAD TO ACCEPT
AND WHEN THEY DIDN&apos;T WE ADDED
IT TO THE NONDISCRIMINATION
ORDINANCE AND I THINK THERE
WERE CERTAINLY SITUATIONS WHERE
IT IS THE SAME WHERE IT IS TYPE
APPLIED DISCRIMINATION.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT ISSUED I.D.
THERE ARE PLACES WHERE THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SAYS YOU CAN
SIGN THE I9 IF YOU ARE ISSUED A
AN ID FROM A LOCAL STATE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ENTITY LONG
AS IT IS A PHOTOGRAPH AND WHY
THAT IS NOT ABLE TO ALSO
ENTITLE YOU TO AN ADULT
BEVERAGE WHEN THE STATE LAW IN
MICHIGAN IS THAT IT NEEDS TO
INDICATE YOUR AGE RIGHT IN THE
INTERVENTION, SOME HUMAN RIGHTS
INTERVENTION THAT WOULD HELP I
THINK CREATE THE KIND
OF COMMUNITY THAT WE ALL WANT.
AND SO I WOULD LIKE US TO BEGIN
TO LOOK AT HOW WE MIGHT BE ABLE
TO DO THAT AND SOME REQUESTING
THAT WE WORK IN GROUPS TO LOOK
AT AND MAYBE AMENDING THE
NONDISCRIMINATION ORDINANCE TO
INCLUDE TITLE AND PROOF
OF IDENTITY.
THANK YOU.
WHICH I HOPE QUESTIONS DID YOU
ALL READ THE KNOW I&apos;M ASKING
CAN YOU AND DID YOU DID YOU
READ THE RESOLUTION WHICH WHICH
SUMMARIZED SUMMARIZES ALL THIS?
I MEAN I&apos;M WONDERING IF YOU
HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT WHAT WE&apos;RE
DOING AND WHY WE&apos;RE DOING IT.
&gt;&gt; WELL, YOU KNOW WHAT I&apos;D
ACTUALLY ASK I WOULD ACTUALLY
ASK THAT THE WORK GROUP GET TO
START FROM THE BEGINNING
BECAUSE THAT RESOLUTION STARTS
FROM LET&apos;S LOOK AT CREATING A
BUILDING A BRIDGE.
RIGHT.
A PUBLIC PRIVATE BRIDGE THAT
CAN HELP DECIDE TO ACCOMPLISH
ITS PURPOSE WHEN I THINK THE
WORK GROUP NEEDS TO BEGIN WITH
HUMORAL THE POPULATIONS
AFFECTED HERE WHO ALL OF THE
STATUTES THAT I HAVE RESEARCHED
SO THAT PEOPLE I HAVE SOME
CONFIDENCE IN AND ITS VALIDITY
SO THAT IF WE COULD HOLD OFF ON
THIS RESOLUTION OK, THAT WOULD
BE GOOD.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;VE GOT A GROUP THAT IS
THAT HAS VOLUNTEERED TO WORK
KEITA DENIS&apos;S OFFERED TO CREATE
A ZONE AND SCHEDULE THE MEETING
.
THANK YOU.
SO ARE WE READY TO LET THIS
GROUP GO TO WORK?
WE&apos;VE GOT A GOOD START.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, KEITA.
I JUST SAY THANK YOU AGAIN FOR
ALL YOUR WORK ON THIS.
AND CREATING THE IDEA IN THE
FIRST PLACE AND THEN SEEING
WHAT WE CAN DO TO PROTECT.
THANK YOU.
YOU KNOW, I DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU
GUYS HAD BEEN READERS
OF ELEANOR ROOSEVELT BUT SHE
WAS ASKED 10 YEARS AFTER THE
PASSAGE OF THE DECLARATION
OF HUMAN RIGHTS WHERE THE HUMAN
RIGHTS BEGIN AND SHE SAID IN
SMALL PLACES CLOSE TO HOME LIKE
BECAUSE IT IS IN OUR
COMMUNITIES WHERE EVERYONE
EXPECTS AND LOOKS FOR EQUAL
TREATMENT AND TO ME THAT WAS
ALL THE MOTIVATION I NEED IT
THE SCOPE OF THIS IS THIS IS
WHY WE&apos;RE HERE AND I&apos;M PROUD
OF ALL OF THIS.
&gt;&gt; YES, THAT&apos;S WHAT WE WILL DO.
IS THERE ANY NEW BUSINESS ANY
COMMISSIONER COMMUNICATIONS,
ANY MORE DISCUSSION?
WELL, IN THAT CASE, DO WE HAVE
MOTION TO ADJOURN OUR MOTION TO
ADJOURN SECOND THAT&apos;S ALL IN
FAVOR.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU ALL.
THANK YOU